"19 million people as members of CPSU, 5 million strong army at the very least, millions of police and internal forces, not to mention the all-powerful KGB in 1991-1992 have abandoned their favorite nuclear power of the USSR to die without a single shot fired. Where were all the leading communists and checkists? Maybe they've formed a guerilla army to fight for their beloved Soviet Motherland, for the Soviet Government, for socialism, for one and indivisible USSR? Quite the contrary, they engaged in privatization en masse, moved from raikoms and obkoms into cushy offices.

The same can be said about the ordinary Soviet patriots, that are now shedding crocodile tears because of the Greatest Geopolitical Catastrophe™. There isn't a single case of them joining the Soviet guerilla armies. There wasn't even a phenomenon of communist terrorism after the USSR's collapse. And thank God for that. But a fact is a fact, the Soviet patriots commited mass treason and made no attempts to stop the collapse and the capitulation of the USSR."
-- Anon

After understanding what kind of shenanigans Gorbachev is up to, his closest supporters, in August 1991, quickly whip up a project with a tongue-twisting name of SCSE (ГКЧП) - State Committee on the State of Emergency - with the ultimate goal of preventing total collapse of a nation already in a comatose state. The last-ditch attempt to take a sharp turn and go along the Maoist model, following the Soviet laws.

It all stared with a delegation of 4 men being sent to the Gorbachev's villa in Crimea, demanding to enact martial law. Before that, the question was raised 2 times in lawful order, but now Gorbachev has been taken into house arrest. It happened because Gorbachev has been already sidelined be both the USA and USSR and were preparing to replace him. For August 20th another allied deal was to be made, and the mutineers had reasons to suspect that it was yet another pound of Gorby's liberalizing bullshit that will kill the nation for good.

The mutineers have made a move and made an "address to the Soviet people" (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D7t-GpKHoAg) and offered the people to enjoy the "Swan Lake".

Quite a long time later, it was found out that the mutineers' plans were known by the CIA a MONTH before the coup, about which they've warned Yeltsin. The coup itself was akin to a simulation: usually during the coup all movement across the country is stopped and so are all the media. But here? No tanks had the ammunition, soldiers had no ammo and the men of the Internal Forces had one magazine each. Was that a bluff or a real "lawful coup" - we'll never know. According to the mutineers, this shakeup would stir enough panic to allow them to enact an all-union Martial Law. But by the morning of August 19th the Muscovites already knew that nobody is going to roadkill or shoot anybody and the reactionary "democratic militias" began to form amongst those who saw the emergence of SCSE as a return to the totalitarian regime. Among them were the people disillusioned with the communist rule, students, but also small business owners and co-op owners afraid of yet another dekulakization (the funny thing is tha the SCSE has explicitly voiced in favor of private enterprises and Maoist-style protectionism).

In contrast with the popular image of passive citizenry, the SCSE also had support of their own. As a result, Yeltsin, literally jumping into the political scene on top of a T-72 parked right outside of the House of the Soviets, has declared that everyone is at fault: both Gorbachev AND the SCSE. As a result, the August Coup was a failure: one of the members has commited self-deletion and the rest were imprisoned for a bit more than a year. Yeltsin's ratings skyrocket even higher than on the RSFSR elections (57% approval) and becomes a symbol of hope and renovated Russia.

The coup organizers are arrested and are litigated against for a year and a half by the Supreme Court in search of corpus delicti, BUT FAILING TO FIND ANY. According to the Soviet law, the criminals aren't the SCSE members, so they were eventaully granted amnesty.

The failed coup has been subverted and completed by Yeltsin in a direction of his own. The institutions were retooled from soviet subordination to a republican one. That was anti-constitutional and was a Coup d'Etat in the RSFSR, but nobody cared at the moment. The foreign powers have acknwledged Yeltsin as a legitimate ruler of USSR, the people have siltently approved the counter-mutineers and the independence proponents in the Soviet republics have also accepted his victory. Now, separatists became Yeltsin's natural allies. By August 22nd the Hign Council of RSFSR has decreed to change the RSFSR flag to a red-white-blue tricolor.

Yeltsin's quote about letting the separatists "take as much independence as they can swallow" said just a year ago, now has a new meaning - the drive to restore the USSR is now a tool against the RSFSR's government, and that's why the separatist support in the remaining Soviet republics became a weapon against the USSR's government. It increased the number of followers and decreased the number of opponents.

The dissolution process has now begun.

When the power in Transnistria has went from the bureaucrats to the working soviets, the central power did not support them, taking the side of the Moldavian fascists. When the High Council of of Checnya has turned out to be "pro-communist" Yeltsin and Burbulis wthout any qualms acknwledged the radical mujahadeens and nationalists to be legitimate. In similar fasion, Velihov and Sobchak hepled overthrow the communists in Tajikistan, which led to civil war. This counter-coup has led to the ultimate destruction of the USSR as a nation and as a socio-economic model, which almost nobody at the time understood. Many people thought that they'll live like in USA but with all the benefits of the USSR. The coup, in turn demanded constitutional changes, since it was completely illegitimate.

It was politically profitable to support the Russian Church AND Western values at the same time, to propagandize the "freedom and democracy" in the American fasion together with the supporting of pseudohistorians, monarchists and facists, gobbing about the Vlasovite heroes. It all created even more confustion in the already confused populace, but also legitimized the government that has appeared as a result of anti-communism, without a positive program of their own. If Gorby has allowed everything in the hopes of a natural ideology emerging, the neoliberals have gone the "ANYONE, but the commies" route, thowing absolutely everything into the information field. At that time, the newspapers were full of articles about evil Stailn that perverted the democratic legacy of Lenin, and about evil Lenin that brought the Great Russia to it's knees, about evil marxists-satanists and a thousand more variations of this infogarbage, remotely related to the history of the USSR.

In other words, bad or not, mythologized or not, but the *systemic* Soviet consciousness has been defragmented to acceptable levels, because systemic thought is much more resistant to brainwashing than the resulting thought salad.