"...Lenin died in October 1993."
-- Yegor Letov

A.k.a "Bloody October", a.k.a "Black October". A direct continuation of the August events. A fiery start of the last stage of political and economic reforms of total transformation of the Soviet socio-economic model.

It begins with the end of Yeltsin's emergency powers, granted to him to implement the "shock therapy" in 1992. After understanding how deep of a hole did Yeltsin dig for them, almost everyone in the Supreme Council attempted to remove him. Raging debates about the new constitution for the new Russia erupt.

In the blue side of the ring stands Yeltsin with his supporters and neolibs; on the red side - the parliament, Hasbulatov, Rutskoy, commies, nationalists, and everybody else who's tired of Benya's bullshit reforms.

Benya and co. rapidly lost the trust of the populace and demanded the continuation of privatization that only empowered them further. Attempting to dethrone Benya from his seat, his opponents proposed to stop the expensive social reforms that have already yielded "positive results" in the form of  annual population loss of about 1,000,000 people. To guarantee the continuation of their reforms, Yeltsinoids voiced in support for empowerment of the President. Their opponents and everybody else voiced in support to codify the supremacy of the Supreme Council over the President, making Russia a parliamental republic.

Here's an interesting question: if they DID defeat Yeltsin, would the reforms continue? YES, they would, but using the neokeynesian methods (http://scepsis.net/library/id_3512.html), like in the Czech Republic, Slovenia, or even Belorussia, in favor of other oligarchs. Benya's opponents were expressing the interests of other Important People, playing on the nostalgia of the post-Soviet populace at the same time. Just like during the August Putch, it wasn't a liberals vs commies issue; it was a struggle of liberal LARPers vs commie LARPers. In these 2 fateful years they were literally on the same side, but now they expess the interests of different clans. The first proof of this - mass killing in the criminal underworld IMMEDIATELY after the coup. Everyone who was under protection of Rutskoy and Hasbulatov have lost their businesses and more often than not - their lives.

=======
ACTION!
=======

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5hCJjfXZ_7M

The supporters of Hasbulatov and Rutskoy lock themselves in the White House. At this point the only way to resolve this deadlock would be the use of FORCE. Several regions have acknowledged Rutskoy as an Acting President; the All-Siberian assembly has issued an ultimatum to Yeltsin's forces to lift the blockade of the White House or they'll blockade the Transsiberian Railway. The governor of Nobosibirsk is being suppored by local politicians and police. The Russian Orthodox Church has volunteered to be a mediator in this dispute, thus acknowledging Rutskoy as an equal to Yeltsin. Time was runnig out for Yeltsin, no provocation attempts have gone through.

The testimony of a soldier of the Tamanian Division about the events of October 1993: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1BGRjhrcs_Q

